In short, unfair means refers to cheating. It involves any attempt by a student to
gain unfair advantage over another student in the completion of an assessment or exam, or
assist someone else in gaining an unfair advantage.
Consequences
The consequence of unfair means can be serious. A student may face action by his/her academic department or formal disciplinary action. 

Some unfair means used in examination includes Plagiarism, leaking of the exam paper and in extreme cases giving bribe to the invigilator to support cheating.

i) Plagiarism occurs when you submit someone else's work or ideas - eg the work of an expert, lecturer or fellow/former student - without making it clear that it is not your own work. Plagiarism can be committed knowingly or accidentally.

ii) The leaking of exam papers directly means the releasing of question papers prior to the exam. To avoid this our Indian Government has declared strict punishment to the guilty. 
The imprisonment will be from five to 10 years and fine from Rs 10 lakh to Rs 10 crore if any case any person impersonates or leak, attempt to leak or conspires to leak question paper, procures or attempts to possess question paper in an unauthorised manner or solves/attempts to solve/seek assistance to solve question.

iii) This is a very rare case in India, in which invigilators are given money by the students so that they support cheating during the examination. This is illegal in almost every country across the globe and the guilty are severely punished.

Reporting to the examination hall.
1. No student will be allowed to bring his/her mobile phones to the examination
hall.
2. All students must carry with them their Identity Card during the
examinations and produce the same for verification, if required.
3. The students should ensure that they bring with them all the concerned
material that is allowed by the concerned course instructor, which would be
needed to take the examination.
4. The students are expected to take their respective seats 5 minutes prior to the
scheduled commencement of the examination.
5. Students should ensure that they are not carrying on their person any
material, other than that allowed by the course instructor for the particular
examination, before they take their seats in the exam hall. Any such material
found on their person during the examination would be construed as a
deliberate attempt to use unfair means and would be dealt with accordingly.
II. At the start of the examination
1. The doors of the examination hall would be closed 5 minutes before the
commencement of the examination, for the distribution of the exam material
to the students already seated in the room. The door will be opened, to allow
latecomers, after the last student already seated in the room in time has
received his/her exam material.
2. The latecomers should proceed take their seats and wait for the exam
material to be given to them.
3. No student will be allowed to enter the examination hall 15 minutes after the
commencement of the examination for in-semester examinations and 30
minutes after the commencement of the examination for end-semester
examinations.
III.During the examination.
1. Exchange (borrowing or lending) of any material during the examination is
not allowed.
2. No student will resort to any unfair means of any nature while taking their
examinations. If any student were found to be involved in using unfair means
during an examination, the said student would be immediately expelled from
the exam hall for that examination and the matter would be reported to the
respective course instructor and the Dean (AP) for further action.
3. In case a student is found to be copying from his/her fellow student, then
both the parties, the one providing the assistance and the one seeking the
same, would be punished for the same.
4. In case a student has to leave his/her seat for whatever reason, he/she has to
seek the permission of the concerned invigilator(s) of that exam hall before
doing so. For visiting the rest room, he/she has to seek the permission of the
concerned faculty invigilator of that examination hall before doing so.
5. No supplement(s) would be given to the students in the last 5 minutes of the
examination.
IV. On completion of the examination.
1. No student will be allowed to leave the room in the first 15 minutes of the in
semester examination (typical duration 1 hour) or first 30 minutes of the endsemester examination (typical duration of 3 hours) and in the last 5 minutes
of the examination.
2. Students who are present in the last 5 minutes of the examination will have to
wait till the exam material is collected from all the students by the
invigilators and they are permitted to leave by the faculty invigilator of that
exam hall.
3. While leaving the examination hall the students should not hang around to
discuss the paper. As there may be other examinations still in progress,
quietly leave the building to ensure that you do not disturb them. 





EXAMINATION PATTERN AND WEIGHT-AGE :
The pattern of examination changes periodically by the board. The CBSE new pattern marks the following changes in the same.

The assessment pattern of Class 10 applies to the Class 9 by the CBSE board. The CBSE new pattern of class 9 examination has been changed to a year end exam. Each subject has a total of 100 marks, where 80 marks is assigned toward written examination and 20 marks as internal assessment. The internal assessment marks has three disciplines.

A). 10 marks periodic tests

B). 5 marks for notebook submission and

C). 5 marks for enrichment activity of all subjects

There are no changes in the assessment format for Classes 6 to 8. Yet, the CBSE new patternhas made changes in the number of term exams. Students from classes 6 to 8 have to appear twice in term exams.

A). The board conducts exam at the end of each term

The exam is set based on the syllabus covered during each terms

For term 2 exam, it includes a percentage of questions from term 1 syllabus

As per the latest CBSE exam pattern for class 1 to 5, the assessment of students will be done in two areas i.e.

1. Scholastic

2. Co-scholastic

The scholastic area mostly includes test marks, notebook upkeep and subject enrichment. On the other hand, the co-scholastic areas include skill-based activities, art education, physical educations and other co-curricular activities like dance, art, music, etc. The academic year is split into two sessions i.e. 

1.Formative

2. and Summative Assessments

FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT :
Through this assessment, the students are observed on a regular basis regarding their progress in academics. It includes conversations, quizzes, class-work, visual testing, oral testing, projects, assignments, practical, class test, homework, etc. These formative assessments are purely informal, however, the date and time of test will be announced beforehand. These assessments will be conducted in the regular periods of concerned subjects.

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT:
This assessment test is the final assessment of the student’s performance. This assessment will be conducted twice a year, at the end of each term in the form of a proper pen and paper-based test conducted by the schools themselves.

CBSE PATTERN FOR CLASS 1 TO 5 – GRADING SYSTEM :
All the internal and the external assessments will be made in marks. However, the overall results will be given in grades. The final report card of students will reflect only the grades. The CBSE exam pattern for class 1 to 5 is same and the grades given are on 5 point scale. The grades will be based on a student’s performance in all the 6 exams (4 FAs and 2 SAa).

The current grading system with CBSE exam pattern for class 1 to 5 is discussed in the table given below

Grades	Range	Remarks
A* (Grade – 1)	90% to 100 %	Outstanding
A (Grade – 2)	90% to 100 %	Excellent
B (Grade – 3)	56% to 74 %	Very Good
C (Grade – 4)	35% to 55 %	Good
D (Grade – 5)	Below 35 %	Scope for Improvement
WEIGHTAGE AND EXAMINATION PATTERN :
A. FOR CLASS IX
The pattern of examination for class IX will be similar to that of class X with only one exam at the end of the academic year. Out of a total of 100 marks, 80 marks have been assigned to written exams while the remaining 20 have been divided between three disciplines: periodic tests (10 marks), notebook submission (5 marks) and subject enrichment activity (5 marks).

B. FOR CLASSES VI TO VIII
Classes VI to VIII will have the same format of assessment. However, a class year has been divided into two Terms. So, students of these classes will have to appear for exams twice a year, i.e., at the end of each Term. While questions in the Term 1 exam will be based on the syllabus covered during that term, a certain percentage of questions in the Term 2 exam will be based on the Term 1 syllabus. 

PRE NURSERY CLASSES
In pre-primary education, assessment has two tasks. It is used to plan and develop education and to support the well-being, growth and learning of each child. There are no achievement standards for children in pre-primary education.

The teacher follows the development and learning of each child during pre-primary education.  The follow up is based on continuous observations and versatile documentation. Based on the follow-up information and assessment conclusions based on it, the teacher adapts instruction and learning environments, as well as possible support received by children.

The teacher and other personnel involved in guiding the children give daily encouraging feedback on the strengths and development areas of the children. Also guardians are provided with regular feedback on their child.

Pre-primary education also promotes children’s capabilities for self-evaluation, which will support the development of their self-concept and learning skills.

The teacher may formulate an individual learning plan for each child in cooperation with the child and the guardian.  A child’s pre-primary education plan is a plan for the progress of a child’s growth and learning and for the support needed. It is a pedagogical document based on the curriculum. The education providers are not required to draft individual plans for each child in pre-primary education, but in practice most do. A learning plan is mandatory if the child receives intensified support.

A certificate of attendance may be awarded at the end of pre-primary education. Such a certificate may be supplemented with a description of the pre-primary education provided.

 

Assessment Chart for 2019-20
PA – 1
Pre Nursery to Grade- 5 (Oral & Written)
Grade – 6 to Grade -10 (Written)
PA – 2
Pre Nursery to Grade- 5 (Oral & Written)
Grade – 6 to Grade -10 (Written)
Half Yearly
Pre Nursery to Grade- 5 (Oral & Written)
Grade – 6 to Grade -10 (Written)
PA – 3
Pre Nursery to Grade- 5 (Oral & Written)
Grade – 6 to Grade -10 (Written)
Final Exam
Pre Nursery to Grade- 5 (Oral & Written)
Grade – 6 to Grade -9 (Written)
Pre-Boards
Grade -10 (Written)
–
Practical
Grade -10
2 Sets
Mock Exam
Grade -10
4 Sets




The schedule for annual examination has been presented at school for the month of March.

The CBSE exam pattern  for the primary section from class 1-5 follows the model given below. There are two  assessment areas where students will have to undergo:

Scholastic
Co-scholastic
The scholastic assessment is based on the marks the children gets in the class tests ( unit tests), the way in which the child is maintaining the notebooks and also well-versed the child is in the subject. The co-scholastic assessment checks the abilities of the students in various skills such as art, sports, dance, art, music etc.

The academic year is divided into two sessions i.e. Formative and Summative Assessments.

Formative Assessment:
In this assessment the students are under observation on a regular basis where their academics are monitored. The tests are not formal rather include general dialogues, quizzes, notes, testing through visuals and through speech or oral assignments. Assignments range from projects (where a little bit of research is involved) and some of it could be home work. These tests are informal, but the teacher announces much before that this work will be considered for the formative assessment. These tests are conducted through out the year on a regular basis.

Summative Assessment:
Summative assessment, as suggested by the title, means that it “sums up” the performance of the entire year.  This assessment is conducted two times in a year, towards the end of each term. This is a written exam on paper which is conducted by schools internally.

Grading System:

Marks are awarded in each of the internal and the external assessments, but the results are given in grades and the report card will reflect only the grades. The exam pattern in CBSE is the same from class 1 to 5 where the grades are measured on a 5-point scale. The grades will be based on a student’s performance in all the 6 exams (4 FAs and 2 SAa) and is indicative of the following range and remarks.

The current grading system with CBSE exam pattern for class 1 to 5 is discussed in the table given below:

Grades	Range	Remarks
A* (Grade – 1)	90% to 100 %	Outstanding
A (Grade – 2)	75% to 89 %	Excellent
B (Grade – 3)	56% to 74 %	Very Good
C (Grade – 4)	35% to 55 %	Good
D (Grade – 5)	Below 35 %	Scope for Improvement